I will dare to review and evolve
one of the most well-known and
most accepted models in business
strategy, which is Michael
Porter's generic strategy.
What happens is that the so-
called model we have studied,
because it really is excellent,
is born in the mid-1980s and
since then many things have
happened.
And among other things, what has happened
is that platforms are revolutionizing
absolutely almost every sector
and in fact, as we have seen,
even the five largest companies
in the world in terms of business
capitalization are platforms.
Let us consider the following.
What is the competitive advantage of
the platform?
We have to give a response within
the scheme of the generic
strategies.
Is it cost leadership or is it differentiation?
Let us think about it
with a concrete example.
We have here the two leading real
estate portals in Spain, Fotocase
and Idealista.
What they do is connect
the housing offer by owners,
real estate agencies,
promoters, etc. and
demand, which are buyers
or tenants, purchase
and rent.
So, what is the competitive
advantage in this sector?
What is it that he does?
What is the factor that contributes
to one of the two, to that Fotocase
and Idealista grow one relative
to the other or that Fotocase and
Idealista have grown more than the
rest of portals with a lower quota?
Or would you challenge me to give
me an explanation from the point
of view of Michael Porter's generic
strategies?
Have you sought cost leadership or
have you sought differentiation?
What is the key really?
The key in a platform model is
the network effect, the network
effect, the ability to connect,
the volume of users
it has.
Really the competitive advantage
that Fotocase and Idealista have
over the rest of portals with a lower
share is not that they are
cost leaders or that they offer
nothing different because the
functionalities are
exactly the same in almost
all marketplaces of this type.
The real competitive advantage is
the volume of users, it is the network
effect they have generated that
makes as we saw that they bring
much more value and generate
a huge barrier to entry.
So I think we should review Michael
Porter's generic strategy model
since platforms are gaining
so much importance we
should review it and we should
incorporate a third source
of competitive advantage
that is the ability to
connect, which is the network.
And only so would we be able to answer
the question I have asked you in
a sector in which several marketplaces
or various platforms compete,
what is the competitive
advantage?
What makes some people grow
more than others?
Until now we could not give the
answer because it is neither
cost leadership nor differentiation,
the true source of competitive
advantage in this case
is the ability to connect.